Rules

Original author: Klaus Tauber
2 to 6 players aged 11 years


Goal
The player who will score the first 10 or more points wins the game. The number of points may varies
between 10 and 15, depending on what you agree in advance.


Structure of the board
Divide the land and sea spaces. Leave a land tile in the middle, followed by two desert fields there
parallel to. Continue with the rest of the land tiles in a spiral shape around the middle, so that
the country is a symmetry. And finally place the sea tile around the island. You do this alternately
in the order Water - 2: 1 harbor - Water - 3: 1 harbor. The rotation of the harbor is random, but
both harbor points must connect with the mainland.


Then the number tokens are placed on the game board with the letters up and this in
a spiral shape, starting from a tile corner of choice. If all the tokens are placed on the board,
they are turned over so that the numbers are clearly visible.


The numbers (2 to 12) are each twice in the game (except the 2 and 12 itself:
only 1 time). They give the probability of the sum of the two dice.
The larger the size of the number, the higher the probability that this sum is diced.
The highest occurring combinations (6 and 8) are also very clear printed in red.
No tokens are placed on the desert tiles.
Once the board is structured, each player chooses a color and will recieve 5
villages (houses), 4 cities (churches), 15 blocks (streets) and a card of the building costs.
The resource cards are placed in five open stacks next to the board. The
variants are forest (wood), pasture (wool), field (grain), Hill (stones), mountain (ore).
The development cards (darker back) are placed face down in a pile. The bandit (black pawn)
needs to be placed in the desert. The two special cards and dice be ready next to the board.


Settlement Phase
This phase is spread over two rounds. Each player is given the opportunity to build two
settlements and two lanes before starting the game itself.

First round
Who dices the highest begins. He places one settlement on a corner of choice and connects
this to a street in a direction of choice. Subsequently, the other players are in the
direction clockwise turn. However, there should be kept in mind that there is a distance rule!
	- Distance rule
	  A settlement may only be put on a free intersection if the three
	  nearest intersections are free of settlements or cities. It does not matter who
	  stands there, the intersection should be remain unoccupied.

Second round
After this, the person who was last in the first round, must place a second settlements. The
other players will follow in counterclockwise direction. The second settlements may be 
- taking into account the distance rule - placed everywhere. Immediately after placing the
second settlements, each player will receive their first resources. For each land tile that is
adjacent to a settlement, the player will receive one corresponding resource card from the
stock. The Players keep these resource cards hidden from each other. When the last player placed
his second settlement, the game begins.

Gameplay
Each player goes through per turn the following three phases:
	- Earnings from the land tiles
	- Trading
	- Build
	- Some special events


a) Earnings from the land
The player whos turn it is must roll both dice. The sum of the two dice determines
the number on the land tile that provides resources. Any player who has a settlement or city on
this piece of land, receives a resource card (two if it is a city). If there are no more resource
cards in stock, no player will receive the card in that turn.

b) Trading
After this the player can trade with other players in order to get the resources that he misses.
We distinguish the winning domestic trade and maritime trade.

	- Domestic Trade
	  The player may trade resource cards with all players. He shares with the other players what
	  he needs and what he is willing to give in exchange for it. It is important that there can
	  only be exchanged with the player whose turn it is, not amongs the other players when it's
	  not their turn.

	- Maritime trade
	  Here the player can trade resource cards without the help of his fellow players.
	  In the most simple exchange, the player can exchange 4 resource cards of one kind to 1
	  resource card of choice. Owning a harbor is not necessary. When a player however has a
	  settlement at the sea, he can d much more interesting deals. At a simple harbor (with ?)
	  the player can always exchange three identical resource cards for another 1 of choice.
	  At a special harbor the player needs only two identical cards, the same as pictured on the
	  harbor, to exchange against one new resource card of choice.

c) Building
The player whose turn it is can also build to increase his points. In exchange for
combinations of resource cards (Building costs card) he could build many streets,
settlements or cities.

Costs:
	street: wood + stone
	A new street must be built next to already owned streets, villages and cities. On
	each street only one street can be built. Once a player a has a contiguous road of five pieces,
	he receives the special card "longest Road" giving him two extra points. A road can be
	interrupted or another player can build a longer road. At that moment, the special card will
	go to the player with the longest road. When two or more players have an equally long street, the card is
	back to the stock.

	Settlement: wood + stone + grain + wool
	Taking into account the distance rule. The settlement must be placed at at least one owned street.
	Any settlement on the board also provides one point and a player can earn 1 resource card if the dice
	determine this.

	City: 2 grain + 3 ore
	The player converts his settlement into a city. He changes the house for a church.
	Each city is worth 2 points and can earn 2 resource cards.

	Development card: grain + wool + ore
	If a player wants to buy a development card, he takes the first one on the stack in
	exchange for the three required resource cards. The resulting development card(s) is best kept a secret
	for others. A properly purchased card should not be used right away. There are 14 knights,
	6 Progress cards and 5 points in the game.

d) Special events + cards

	- The bandit
	  When a player dices 7 at the beginning of his turn, the player must move one of the two
	  bandits to any other land tile. The players who have settlements or cities adjacent to
	  the land tiles where the robbers will be placed on, and have more than seven cards,
	  must give half of their cards. These players also do not receive resource cards until the
	  bandit has been moved again. The installer of the bandit can still steal a resource from a
	  player whose settlement or city adjacent to a tile where the bandit has been placed on,
	  if available. When there are several players, he chooses one from a victim of choice.
	  Robbing itself will happen closed: you can not see what kind of card you steal. As long as
	  a bandit stands on a tile, no player receives resource cards of that tile.

	- Playing Development Cards
	  At any time during your turn you may play 1 Development Card. But it may not be a card
	  you bought during the same turn!

	- Knight
	  When a player plays this card, he must put the rover on another land tile. He also
	  steals one resource card of any player who has a settlement or city adjacent to the tile.
	  Played Knight cards remain open for the player on the table. A player with 3-played
	  Knight cards receives the special card "Largest Army". This gives him 2 extra points.
	  This card goes back to the stock if someone else has as much Knight cards, or goes to who
	  at that time again, has the "Largest Army".

	- Progress
	  The person who plays such a card, must follow the command on the card. The card then must
	  return back under the pile.
	  - Road construction: the player may immediately build two new streets (free)
	  - Discovery: the player may immediately take 2 resource cards of your choice
	  - Monopoly: all players must give all their resource cards of a certain
		kind - to be determined by the player using the card - to that player
	  - Points: these cards provide additional points to be the best and only shown on the end
	  	of the game.